15s, welcome to Word on Fire Catholic Ministries.
Word on Fire is an apostolate dedicated to the mission of evangelization.
Using media both old and new,
To share the faith on every continent,
and to facilitate an encounter with Christ and his church.
The efforts of Word on Fire engage the culture and bring the transformative power of God's Word where it is most needed.
Today, we invite you to join Bishop Robert Barron as he preaches the Gospel and shares the warmth and light of Christ with each one of us.
Peace be with you.
Friends, on this fifth Sunday of Easter, we have an extraordinary gospel.
And again, like last week, it's very short. It's very punchy, but it is at the heart. 1-800-4
Of the Christian thing
It's the beginning of Jesus' last supper discourse, which is the longest discourse of Jesus anywhere in the New Testament.
It's this lengthy,
I'm spiritually incredibly rich.
monologue gives.
The night before he dies. And this really is the very beginning of it.
Here's a little bit of what he says.
"'My children, I'll be with you only a little while longer, "'and that's true, it's the night before he dies, "'so it's like
We'll test them if you want.
It's Jesus now speaking to us at the end of his life.
As I have loved you, so you should also love one another.
This is how all will know that you are my disciples.
If you have love
For one another.
okay.
I know you're likely to think,
Yeah, I've heard that like a hundred times before.
It seems almost to have been out of the way.
No, no.
To understand Jesus here, we have to understand what a strange thing.
Love.
is, the way the word is being used here.
I think of Dostoyevsky's great line that authentic love
is a harsh and dreadful thing.
If you take this in some sentimentalized way or just stating a sort of psychological banality, you've not read it right. You've not understood it.
Yeah. Not far from my house, there's a Unitarian church there.
And I go buy it a lot because I...
I walk or I go by in the car.
And outside, there's a big sign, and it says, I'm sorry.
Right. Love your neighbor, right?
And the next two neighbors, a little asterisk that draws your attention down, and it says,
You're, you're
So black neighbor, your brown neighbor, your gay neighbor, your transgender neighbor, your bisexual neighbor, it goes through this list.
So I go buy that sign all the time.
And every time I do, I think,
okay, i get it.
But what precisely do you mean by love? Love.
Love your neighbor. Right. And all those people mentioned, yeah.
But tell me precisely what you mean by love, because the suspicion I have is that
"'Is it might—'
Be something different.
than what Jesus is talking about here.
Now, this is kind of a well-worn path, but the English language,
Which is very rich
and comparably rich, truly, and the vocabulary of English is extraordinary.
Nevertheless, there's a real poverty in English in regard to this little word,
Love.
Because we use that one word, right?
Love to cover such a variety of things
And so a lot of ambiguity sets in on the
When English language users begin talking about love.
Okay, example. We use the same word. Okay.
To say
I love popcorn
I love my grandmother
I love God
I love going to the Cubs game.
All of those things. All of those things.
And they couldn't be more different.
And the texture of the experience in each one is so different.
Yet we use the same word, love.
So Jesus has loved one another.
All right. Well, what do you mean by that?
Well, she's a Greek.
Of the New Testament.
It's actually far richer here.
Because the Greek New Testament includes a variety of words.
all of which are translated love in English.
But mean very different things.
And I want to just review this with you because I think it's very clarifying.
When it comes to this central command of Jesus,
Here are the three words I'm talking about in Greek.
Eros
Philea
and agape.
Eros
Philia and Agape.
All of those are translated.
As love
But they mean,
Very different things.
Okay.
What does eros mean?
Well, because our word erotic,
Is derived from that.
I would say something like this. It means a
Passionate,
Intense.
Desire. Desire.
For something or for someone.
And so you see the obvious sexual overtone, the erotic desire.
It's a desire.
To have
Or to possess.
It's intense.
It drives you toward
The possession of a thing.
Or a person.
Now, mind you, I'm not bad-mouthing the erotic. I mean, let's face it, none of us would be here unless there was something like erotic desire. None of us would be alive unless we were alive.
Unless we had something like this for food and drink.
It's an intense, passionate,
Drive.
um.
You know, I mentioned I love popcorn, right? We'll say that in English. Yeah.
The other night, um,
I love five court
And I might,
I take it as like a midnight snack. But what I usually do is I take it like a small bowl to make sure I only take a limited amount of popcorn. Okay.
Well, the other night,
The bag was right toward the bottom. I thought, oh, there's just a little bit left. I'll take the bag down with me.
So I'm watching TV and I don't know what, I must've been exceptionally hungry and I just devoured that.
I'm like, this popcorn. I finished it, and then I got up to the bar.
The bathroom, I look at myself in the mirror and I've got curls and popcorn on my face. I've got bits of it on my shirt. I thought,
You're like a heroin addict. This is like, this is like you're addicted to this thing. And it's true. I have that kind of, I just love it. I love politics.
of popcorn.
If it were as dangerous as heroin, I'd be in some serious trouble. Well, that's what Eros is like.
It's this passionate desire.
For something, for someone.
Okay the second word
15.
I think of Philadelphia, right? The city of brotherly love, we say. Well, Philia in Greek has a sense of love.
Friendship
It's the affection
between friends. I think when you say,
i like that guy.
Yeah, she's great. I really like her a lot. She's someone I want to spend time with. That guy, he's like my buddy. I like spending time with him.
That's
Philea.
Now, you might say, you know, it's less...
Self-interested than Eros. Eros has that sense of, I'm like an animal passion.
For food for drink, for sex, to possess the other.
Well, Philia isn't really like that. Philia is like, no, I...
You're my friend.
I want to be with you. That's not what I want to possess you. I want to...
Be with you. I want to spend time with you.
well.
Right. Jesus is not saying...
To his disciples.
I want you to have Eros for one another. Now, that's pretty clear.
He's not urging them. You must love one another in that erotic sense.
Nor is he saying
in the Greek that's used there I want you to have philia for one another
See, that would mean
I want you all to be friends.
So, so Peter and James and John and all of you, I want you all to be friends.
I think there's a very good chance that...
The disciples, some of them, didn't get along with other disciples.
They're all following Jesus. They're all chosen by the Lord, but did it mean they all liked each other? No.
That they all would happily spend time together? Not necessarily.
And he's not commanding that. I want you all to be friends.
Nor is he telling his followers down through the centuries.
You have to be friends with everybody.
No, no, that's not what he says.
The verb that's used
And now the distinction I hope becomes clear. Not Eros, not Philia.
The verb use or the noun rather is
Agape.
I've translated love, indeed, like the other ones. But what does it mean?
You probably heard me talk a lot about Thomas Aquinas's
famous characterization. He would have called it Caritas in his Latin.
To will the good of the other.
To will,
The good of the other.
Agape.
And that's the command
If it Jesus gives to his disciples, it's not.
And to us.
Okay. That's how people will know that you're my follower, that you have agape.
For one another, you will the good of each other.
Mind you, it's not a desire to possess that's eros.
Nor is it a desire
To spend time with, that's philia.
It's a desire for the good of the other.
Therefore, it's a
Self
Sacrificing move
Maybe this way, maybe this way.
It's
Commitment to the other.
That's agape.
Yeah.
So we're so good, we sinners, at getting around these things.
What do we end up saying very often? What do we act out very often?
is a
I pretend I'm willing you're good.
But in fact, I'm desiring what's good for you that you might then give me something good in return.
I'll be just or kind to you that you might be just or kind to me.
That's not agape.
That's not...
Willing the good of the other, that's just using the other for my own.
Good.
Agape
Love as Jesus commands it.
Is breaking free.
Of the black hole.
Of one's own egotism.
Right? Right? Fellow sinners that draws us
The whole world into me and my preoccupations.
Jesus is saying, I want you to have this quality that breaks free of that.
That's...
Love. Love.
As he's commanding it.
Can I give you a concrete example here, one of the great saints of the 20th century?
1999, Maximilian Colby, right? The man who famously,
Exchange gave himself an exchange.
for a man that the Nazis were going to kill.
He said, take me instead. I'm a Catholic priest. Take me in his place.
And the Nazis did, and they starved him to death.
Which is one of the worst ways to die.
Did Maxwell and Colby...
No, the man very well. I don't think so.
Was he his friend? Did he have philia toward him? Did he want to spend time with him? I mean, I don't know is my honest answer. I
I don't think there's any evidence of that.
But Kolbe shows in the most dramatic way possible.
Agape
A self-forgetting
Self-sacrificing
Of willing the good
Of the other.
That's what Jesus is talking about.
Not Eros, not Philia. Nothing wrong with those two things. Okay.
But that's not what he's talking about.
He's talking about this kind of
Of self-surrendering love.
You know, a great biblical place to look.
If you want to follow up from this sermon,
Go to 1 Corinthians 13. You've probably heard it right at a wedding at some point in your life.
But listen to Paul, because Paul here is not talking about Eros and not talking about Philaea.
He's talking about
Agape
And it's rendered love, of course, in English, but listen to him.
Love agape
Is patient.
Now, see, why patient? Well, because it's not interested in its own good. It's interested in the good of the other. Right.
And therefore, it's going to bear all things. It's going to put up with everything because it wants the good of the other. Right.
Love is not envious or boastful or arrogant. Why? Because it's taking you out of the ego and its preoccupations.
It positively wants to
What's good for you?
Love does not insist on its own way. See, that's the mark of love.
of egotism. You might say it's the mark of the erotic form of love too. It's I want this for me. I want to possess it.
I love doesn't. I got paid doesn't do bad.
It doesn't insist on its own way.
Listen, it does not rejoice in wrongdoing, but rejoices in the truth. See, if you're just all about yourself, what you might rejoice in wrongdoing is doing the wrong.
The wrong thing might benefit me, right?
But real love cares for the good of the other. Therefore, it's not interested in wrongdoing.
It rejoices in the truth and then beautifully.
It bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things. That's not Eros 2.
It's not Philea.
It's the self
Emptying, self forgetting.
Love.
Of the other,
It's willing the good.
Of the other.
And that's everybody, the command.
That Jesus gives the night before he dies.
That's how people will know.
That we are his disciples.
And God bless you.
Thank you for listening to this week's homily from Bishop Robert Barron.
For more resources from Bishop Barron, please visit wordonfire.org.